# H.261

- it is earlier digital video compression.
- initiated by CCITT (Consultative committe for international telegraph telephone) in year 1988.
- finally it was accepted by ICUT (International Telecommunication union Comuunication) in 1990.
- this standard was designed for following-:
    - video phone.
    - video conference.
- It is designed and developed for video conferencing applications to be used over ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) lines.
- The ISDN has bit-rate of 64 Kbps and higher in the multiple of 64 Kbps.
- It offers maximum coding delay of 150 msec.
- H.261 defines twovideo formats-:
    - CIF
    - QCIF
- H.261 supports I-frames and P-frames.
- I frames do not take any reference to previously coded frames.
- P frames take previous frame as reference.
- MPEG-1 coding standard was derived from H.261 standard.

- H.261 includes combination -:
    - inter-picture prediction -> to remove temporal redundancy
    (temporal redundancy -> suppose there are two pixels and both have same value so it removes that)
    - transform coding -> to remove spatial redundancy
    (spatial redundancy -> suppose ttotal frames are duplicated so it removes that)
    - motion vectors -> for motion compensation.
    (it checks if the previos pixel is matching with the new predicted one or not, if it is matching then succesdful else decode again)

- Design of H.261 -:
    - Prediction (block can be intra//inter coded)
        - intra coded block stand alone
        - inter coded take difference between previous and current frame
    - Block transformation
        - Each block is divided into 8 x 8 matrix and then processed by DCT function.
    - Quantization and Entropy coding
        - compress range of values into single quantum value.
        - entropy coding using huffman coding.

- Advantages -:
    - optimized for low data rates.
    - Strong temporal compression component.
    - best work for videos which has little changes between frames.

- Disadvantages -:
    - Not generally provide good quality
    - Does not play well with low end machines.

# H.263

H.263 is developed based on MPEG-1 and H.261. H.263 is improved standard for low bit-rate application. Similar to H.261, it uses transform coding for intra-frames and predictive coding for inter-frames. It supports POTS at very old rates i.e. 64 Kbps or less.

H.263 uses bi-directionally predicted (B) frames. B-frame is basically average of two P-frames. It uses previous frame and future frame to predict current input frame. B frame size is about 1/3 of the P-frame size.
